# Sec. 2: Background on the Water Wave Model

The surface water wave problem considered is governed by the three-dimensional Euler equations in the regime where the inviscid fluid flow is considered to be incompressible and irrotational. Details of the formulation are given in the article by Wu [18]. The Euler equations are formulated in the presence of free surface boundary conditions. Both the kinematic condition and a Bernoulli law are imposed along this free boundary. Under the assumption that the flow is considered to be incompressible and irrotational, a harmonic velocity potential $\Phi(x,y,z,t)$  is defined through which the velocity field can be obtained. In other words our notation is such that the velocity vector is denoted by $(U,V,W)=\nabla\Phi$ and the free surface wave elevation by $\eta(x,y,t)$. In order to make the free-boundary Euler equations more amenable for theoretical and numerical investigations Wu, in [18], deduced a Boussinesq system (in the horizontal $x$ and $y$ variables) by averaging the velocity potential over the depth. Let the channel be of depth ho; then the reduced potential

$$\phi(x,y,t)=\frac{1}{h_o+\eta}\int_{-h_o}^\eta \Phi(x,y,z,t) dz$$

is used in the weakly nonlinear, weakly dispersive formulation for surface waves. In other words, in this wave-regime, Wu obtained the generalized Boussinesq system

$$\eta_t+(1+\eta)(\phi_{xx}+\phi_{yy})+\eta_x\phi_x+\eta_y\phi_y=0$$
$$\phi+\eta+\frac{(\phi_x)^2+(\phi_y)^2}{2}-\frac{\phi_{xxt}+\phi_{yyt}}{3}=0$$

The horizontal velocity field is obtained by $(u,v) =\nabla\phi$, where now $\nabla = (\partial x, \partial y)$. A Neumann condition for the reduced velocity potential is imposed along the boundaries of the channels; the side walls of the channel are impermeable and very high (no spilling is allowed out of the bed).

Later in 1998, Wu and collaborators [17] explored these equations numerically regarding solitary waves in highly curved channels. A schematic configuration is presented in Fig. 3. The channel is considered to have a constant depth and a uniform rectangular cross section. In [17] the depth is set to 1 and also a boundary-fitted coordinate system is used to rewrite (2.1)–(2.2) so that channels with smooth curved walls can be analyzed. Abusing of notation, due to the change of variables given in [17], the Boussinesq system becomes

$$\eta_t+\frac{1}{L^2}[(1+\eta)\phi_x]_x+[(1+\eta)\phi_y]_y+\frac{\kappa}{L}(1+\eta)\phi_y=0$$
$$\phi_t+\eta+\frac{1}{2L^2}(\phi_x)^2+(\phi_y)^2-\frac{1}{3L^2}\phi_{xxt}-\frac{1}{3}\phi_{yyt}-\frac{\kappa}{3L}\phi_{yt}=0$$

Where $x$ is a coordinate tangential to the side walls, while y is normal to the side walls of the channel. For example, along a circular curve of the channel $x$ plays the role of the angle $\theta$ while y of the radius $r$ in a polar coordinate configuration (see [17, Fig. 1]). A similar formulation in curvilinear coordinates was presented for the (hyperbolic) Saint Venant equations by Fenton and Nalder in [3]. The curvature is denoted by $\kappa$ while the scale factor $L$ is $L=1+κy$. This representation can be used for highly curved bends of the channel. The Neumann condition for the velocity potential is still trivially imposed along the boundaries of the channels. But if the channel has sharp corners this boundary-fitted coordinate system does not hold. Nevertheless the first set of experiments presented in [17] are for sharp-corned $90^{\circ}$-bends which can be done numerically with the original cartesian- coordinates formulation. Regarding Eqs. (2.3)–(2.4) the authors present an expression for the excess mass and the total mechanical energy. These quantities are monitored during their simulations [17] and shown to remain constant at an acceptable level.

Experiments for both sharp-corned $90^{\circ}$-bends as well as smooth, but significantly bent, channels are reported. In particular it is reported that the reflection and transmission properties of solitary waves going through these bends is mostly controlled by the ratio width-to-wavelength. Namely let $b$ be the width of the channel while $\lambda_e$ be the solitary wave’s effective support (to be made more precise below). When $b/\lambda_e$ is small the channel is narrow while when $b/\lambda_e$ is not small the channel is wide. One way to make a distinction between the two regimes is when the reflection pattern changes. In [17] the authors report that in narrow channels a solitary wave makes sharp turns more easily, namely with no reflection. To us this was a surprising fact. As mentioned in Sec. 1, one of the goals of this work is to rationalize the different solitary wave reflection regimes, regarding narrow or wide channels. This was not done in previous works.

As will be shown in subsequent sections, a conformal mapping change of variables plays an important role in rationalizing the reflections of solitary waves at narrow bends, as well as having nice properties regarding the numerical modeling. Note that using the Schwarz– Christoffel mapping [2, 14] both the smooth and sharp-corned $90^{\circ}$-bends are taken care of analytically, in our new formulation.
